Glossary section for Conan docs (#1435)
conan-io/docs: glossary.rst

.. _glossary:

Glossary
========

.. glossary::
   :sorted:

   conanfile
      Can refer to either `conanfile.txt` or `conanfile.py` depending on what's the context it is
      used in.

   conanfile.py

>       The file that defines a Conan recipe that can be used to create or consume packages. Inside of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The file that defines a Conan recipe that is typically used to create packages, but can be used also consume packages only (see conanfile.txt). Inside of
```

      this recipe, it is defined (among other things) how to download the package's source code, how to
      build the binaries from those sources, how to package the binaries and information for futures
      consumers on how to consume the package.

   conanfile.txt

>       The file used to define a package or list of packages to be consumed by a project. It can define

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      It is a simplified version of the `conanfile.py` used only for consuming packages. It define a list of packages to be consumed by a project and can also define
```

>       some more auxiliary files to build or run the project such as generators for different build

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      the :ref:`generators<generators>`  for the build system we are using and if we want to :ref:`import<imports_txt>` files from the dependencies, as shared libraries, executables or assets.
```

      systems or files to be imported from the package to the local folder.

   recipe
      Python script defined in a `conanfile.py` that specifies how the package is built from sources,
      what the final binary artifacts are, the package dependencies, etc.

   reference
      A package reference is the combination of the package name, version, and two optional fields
      named user and channel that could be useful to identify a forked recipe from the community with
      changes specific to your company. It is show in the the form of: `<name>/<version>@<user>/<channel>`.

   package
      A Conan package is a collection of files meant to be consumed for a certain configuration and
      settings. It can contain binary files such as libraries, headers or tools to be reused by the
      consumer of the package.

   lockfile
      Files that store the information with the exact versions, revisions, options, and configuration
      of a dependency graph. They are intended to make the building process reproducible even if the
      dependency definitions in conanfile recipes are not fully deterministic.

   revision

>       Is the way to implicitly version the changes done in a recipe or package without bumping the

Reviewer: link to revisions docs

      actual reference or package version.

   recipe revision
      A unique ID using the latest VCS hash or a checksum of the recipe manifest (`conanfile.py` with
      files exported if any).

   package revision
      A unique ID using the checksum of the package manifest (all files stored in a binary package).

   package ID
      The package id is a hash of the settings options and requirements used to identify the binary

>       packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      packages. Applying different profiles to the `conan create` command, it will generate different package IDs. e.g: Windows, x86, shared...
```

   binary package

>       Output binary for the recipe compatible for certain settings and options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Output binary for the recipe compatible for certain settings and options. Every binary package is identified by a package_id.
```

   settings

>       Settings are a set of different configurations that define the ABI of your package and that a 

Reviewer: LINK TO THE REF OF THE FILE:

```suggestion
      A set of keys and values, like  `os`, `compiler` and `build_type` that are declared at the `~/.conan/settings.yml` file.
      A conanfile.py file declares a list of "effective" settings, that means, the ones that applying different input values (different "os", "arch", etc) will generate different binary packages (with a different package_id). 
```

>       consumer can indicate as input to retrieve the correct packages for his configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

   options

>       An option is something that can be defaulted by the package creator, like if a library is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The options are declared in the recipes, it is similar to the `setting` concept but it is something that can be defaulted by the recipe creator, like if a library is
```

>       static or shared. Options are specific to each package, and each package creator can define

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      static or shared. Options are specific to each package (there is not a yml file like the `settings.yml` file), and each package creator can define
```

>       static or shared. Options are specific to each package, and each package creator can define

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      static or shared. 
```

>       their options "header_only" for example. There is an option that is the most usual, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

>       recommended name shared = True/False

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The most common example is the "shared" option, with possibles values `True/False` and typically defaulted to `False`.
```

> 

Reviewer: LINK TO OPTIONS

   requirement

>       Packages on which another package depends on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Packages on which another package depends on. They are represented by a conan reference: `lib/1.0@`
```

   build requirement

>       Requirements that are only needed when you need to build a package from sources, but if the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Requirements that are only needed when you need to build a package (that declares the `build requirement`) from sources, but if the
```

>       binary package already exists, you don’t want to install or retrieve them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      binary package already exists, the build-require is not retrieved.
```

   dependency

>       A component that is directly referenced by a program.

Reviewer: I would remove this one,

   dependency graph

>       A directed graph representing dependencies of several Conan packages towards each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      A directed graph representing dependencies of several Conan packages towards each other. The relations between the packages are declared with the `requirements` in the recipes. A dependency graph in Conan depends on the input profile applied because the requirements can be conditioned to a specific configuration.
```
LINK TO METHOD REQUIREMENTS OR WHERE WE DECLARE CONDITIONAL REQUIRES

   build system
      Tools used to automate the process of building binaries from sources. Some examples are Make,
      Autotools, SCons, CMake, Premake, Ninja or Meson.

   toolchain
      A toolchain is the set of tools usually intended for compiling, debugging and profiling
      applications.

   cross compiler
      A cross compiler is a compiler capable of creating an executable intended to run in a platform
      different from the one in which the compiler is running.

   generator
      A generator provides the information of dependencies calculated by Conan in a suitable format

>       for a build system. They normally provide a file that can be included or injected to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      for mainly for a build system. They normally provide a file that can be included or injected to the
```

>       specific build system to help it to find the packages declared in the recipe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      specific build system to help it to find the packages declared in the recipe. But there are also other generators not that are not intended to be used with the build system. e.g "deploy", "ycm". 
```

   build helper
      A build helper is a Python script that translates Conan settings to the specific settings of a

>       build tool.

Reviewer: Examples and link to `CMake` one for example

.. _glossary:

Glossary
========

.. glossary::
   :sorted:

   conanfile
      Can refer to either `conanfile.txt` or `conanfile.py` depending on what's the context it is
      used in.

   conanfile.py
      The file that defines a Conan recipe that can be used to create or consume packages. Inside of

>       this recipe is defined between other things how to download the package's source code, how to

Author: > Some suggestions to the definitions, but I think it is a very good start. Later on, we could include some small examples or references that would complete the definitions.
> 
> Also, do you think this should follow alphabetical order or it is not important?

The `:sorted: ` label should order the definitions alphabetically when the document is generated.

      build the binaries from those sources, how to package the binaries and information for futures
      consumers on how to consume the package.

   conanfile.txt
      The file used to define a package or list of packages to be consumed by a project. Can define
      some more auxiliary files to build or run the project such as generators for different build
      systems or files to be imported fro the package to the local folder.

   recipe
      Python script defined in a `conanfile.py` that specifies how the package is built from sources,
      what the final binary artifacts are, the package dependencies, etc.

   reference
      A package reference is the combination of the package name, version, and two optional fields
      named user and channel that could be useful to identify a forked recipe from the community with
      changes specific to your company.

   package

>       A Conan package is a collection of files meant to be consumed for a certain configuration and

Reviewer: A Conan package is the recipe and the N binary packages.

      also to consume packages only (see conanfile.txt). Inside of this recipe, it is defined (among
      other things) how to download the package's source code, how to build the binaries from those
      sources, how to package the binaries and information for futures consumers on how to consume
      the package.

   conanfile.txt
      It is a simplified version of the `conanfile.py` used only for consuming packages. It defines a
      list of packages to be consumed by a project and can also define the
      :ref:`generators<generators>` for the build system we are using and if we want to
      :ref:`import<imports_txt>` files from the dependencies, as shared libraries, executables or
      assets.

   recipe
      Python script defined in a `conanfile.py` that specifies how the package is built from sources,
      what the final binary artifacts are, the package dependencies, etc.

   reference
      A package reference is the combination of the package name, version, and two optional fields
      named user and channel that could be useful to identify a forked recipe from the community with
      changes specific to your company. It is show in the the form of:

>       ``<name>/<version>@<user>/<channel>``.

Reviewer 2: I think that's not an only format of reference, right?
also there is recipe reference and package reference AFAIK

      what the final binary artifacts are, the package dependencies, etc.

   recipe reference
      A recipe reference is the combination of the package name, version, and two optional fields
      named user and channel that could be useful to identify a forked recipe from the community with
      changes specific to your company. It adopts the form of ``name/version@user/channel``.

   package reference
      A package reference is the combination of the recipe reference and the package ID. It adopts
      the form of ``name/version@user/channel:package_id_hash``.

   package
      A Conan package is a collection of files that include the recipe and the N binary packages
      generated for different configurations and settings. It can contain binary files such as
      libraries, headers or tools to be reused by the consumer of the package.

   lockfile
      Files that store the information with the exact versions, revisions, options, and configuration
      of a dependency graph. They are intended to make the building process reproducible even if the
      dependency definitions in conanfile recipes are not fully deterministic.

   revision

>       It is the :ref:`way<package_revisions>` to implicitly version the changes done in a recipe or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      It is the :ref:`mechanism<package_revisions>` to implicitly version the changes done in a recipe or
```

      package without bumping the actual reference or package version.

   recipe revision

>       A unique ID using the latest VCS hash or a checksum of the recipe manifest (`conanfile.py` with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      A unique ID using the latest VCS hash or a checksum of the `conanfile.py` with
```

>       files exported if any).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      the exported files if any. See the :ref:`revisions mechanism<package_revisions>` page.
```

   package revision

>       A unique ID using the checksum of the package manifest (all files stored in a binary package).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      A unique ID using the checksum of the package (all files stored in a binary package). See the :ref:`revisions mechanism<package_revisions>` page.
```

   package ID
      The package id is a hash of the settings options and requirements used to identify the binary
      packages.  Applying different profiles to the `conan create` command, it will generate
      different package IDs. e.g: Windows, x86, shared...

   binary package

>       Output binary for the recipe compatible for certain settings and options. Usually, there are N

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Output binary usually obtained with a `conan create` command applying settings and options as input. Usually, there are N
```

      binary packages inside one Conan package, one for each set of settings and options. Every
      binary package is identified by a package_id.

   settings
      A set of keys and values, like  `os`, `compiler` and `build_type` that are declared at the
      `~/.conan/settings.yml` file.

   options
      :ref:`Options<conanfile_options>` are declared in the recipes, it is similar to
      the `setting` concept but it is something that can be defaulted by the recipe creator, like if
      a library is static or shared. Options are specific to each package (there is not a yml file

>       like the `settings.yml` file), and each package creator can define their options "header_only"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      like the `settings.yml` file), and each package creator can define their options, "header_only"
```

      from sources, but if the binary package already exists, the build-require is not retrieved.

   dependency graph
      A directed graph representing dependencies of several Conan packages towards each other. The
      relations between the packages are declared with the `requirements` in the recipes. A
      dependency graph in Conan depends on the input profile applied because the requirements can be
      :ref:`conditioned<conditional_settings_options_requirements>` to a specific configuration.

   build system
      Tools used to automate the process of building binaries from sources. Some examples are Make,
      Autotools, SCons, CMake, Premake, Ninja or Meson. Conan has integrations with some of these
      build systems using :ref:`generators<generators>` and :ref:`build helpers<build_helpers>`.

   toolchain
      A toolchain is the set of tools usually intended for compiling, debugging and profiling
      applications.

   cross compiler
      A cross compiler is a compiler capable of creating an executable intended to run in a platform
      different from the one in which the compiler is running.

>    generator

Reviewer: Much sooner

>       A generator provides the information of dependencies calculated by Conan in a suitable format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      A generator provides the information of the dependency tree calculated by Conan in a suitable format
```

      scenarios like CI environments or when using per-project management and storage changing the
      default conan cache location :ref:`could be useful<custom_cache>`.

   editable package
      A :ref:`package<editable_packages>` that resides in the user workspace, but is consumed as if
      it was in the cache. This mode is useful when you are developing the packages, and the projects
      that consume them at the same time.

   workspace
      :ref:`Conan workspaces<workspaces>` allow us to have more than one package in user folders and
      have them directly use other packages from user folders without needing to put them in the
      local cache. Furthermore, they enable incremental builds on large projects containing multiple
      packages.

   transitive dependency
      A dependency that is induced by the dependency that the program references directly. Imagine
      that your project uses the **Poco** library that needs the **OpenSSL** library, and **OpenSSL**
      is calling to the zlib library. In this case, **OpenSSL** and **zlib** would be transitive
      dependencies.

>    profile

Reviewer: Much sooner
